Add RAG Pipelines article (#227)
deepset-ai/haystack-home: content/blog/rag-pipelines-from-scratch/index.md

---
layout: blog-post
title: "RAG Pipelines from scratch"
description: "Let's build a simple RAG Pipeline with Haystack 2.0 by just connecting three components: a Retriever, a PromptBuilder and a Generator."

> featured_image: thumbnail.png

Reviewer: You can add a `featured_image_caption` here if you want. That text will appear below the thumbnail

images: ["blog/rag-pipelines-from-scratch/thumbnail.png"]
alt_image: The Republic of Rose Island
toc: True
date: 2023-10-27

> last_updated:  2023-10-28

Reviewer: You should update these two dates to appear at the top of the articles

Author: Which date should I set?

authors:
  - Sara Zanzottera
tags: ["Haystack 2.0"]
---	

Since the start of this series, one use case that I constantly brought up is Retrieval Augmented Generation, or RAG for short.

RAG is quickly becoming an essential technique to make LLMs more reliable and effective at answering any question, regardless of how specific. To stay relevant in today's NLP landscape, Haystack must enable it.

Let's see how to build such applications with Haystack 2.0, from a direct call to an LLM to a fully-fledged, production-ready RAG pipeline that scales. At the end of this post, we will have an application that can answer questions about world countries based on data stored in a private database. At that point, the knowledge of the LLM will be only limited by the content of our data store, and all of this can be accomplished without fine-tuning language models.

> 💡 *I recently gave a talk about RAG applications in Haystack 2.0, so if you prefer videos to blog posts, you can find the recording [here](https://zansara.dev/talks/2023-10-12-office-hours-rag-pipelines/). Keep in mind that the code might be slightly outdated.*

> # What is RAG?

Reviewer: Every title in the content of the article should be h2 so `##` 
```suggestion
## What is RAG?
```

The idea of Retrieval Augmented Generation was first defined in a [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401) by Meta in 2020. It was designed to solve a few of the inherent limitations of seq2seq models (language models that, given a sentence, can finish writing it for you), such as:

- Their internal knowledge, as vast as it may be, will always be limited and at least slightly out of date.
- They work best on generic topics rather than niche and specific areas unless they're fine-tuned on purpose, which is a costly and slow process.
- All models, even those with subject-matter expertise, tend to "hallucinate": they confidently produce false statements backed by apparently solid reasoning.
- They cannot reliably cite their sources or tell where their knowledge comes from, which makes fact-checking their replies nontrivial.

RAG solves these issues of "grounding" the LLM to reality by providing some relevant, up-to-date, and trusted information to the model together with the question. In this way, the LLM doesn't need to draw information from its internal knowledge, but it can base its replies on the snippets provided by the user.

> ![RAG Paper diagram](rag-paper-image.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![RAG Paper diagram](rag-paper-image.png "the caption you want")
```
you can also add captions here for the images, jfyi.

As you can see in the image above (taken directly from the original paper), a system such as RAG is made of two parts: one that finds text snippets that are relevant to the question asked by the user and a generative model, usually an LLM, that rephrases the snippets into a coherent answer for the question.

Let's build one of these with Haystack 2.0!

> 💡 *Do you want to see this code in action? Check out the Colab notebook [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1vX_2WIRuqsXmoPMsJbqE45SYn21yuDjf?usp=drive_link) or the [gist](https://gist.github.com/ZanSara/cad6f772d3a894058db34f566e2c4042).

> ⚠️ **Warning:** *This code was tested on `haystack-ai==0.88.0`. Haystack 2.0 is still unstable, so later versions might introduce breaking changes without notice until Haystack 2.0 is officially released. The concepts and components however stay the same.*

> # Generators: Haystack's LLM components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Generators: Haystack's LLM components
```

As every NLP framework that deserves its name, Haystack supports LLMs in different ways. The easiest way to query an LLM in Haystack 2.0 is through a Generator component: depending on which LLM and how you intend to query it (chat, text completion, etc...), you should pick the appropriate class.

> We're going to use ChatGPT for these examples, so the component we need is [`GPTGenerator`](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/blob/main/haystack/preview/components/generators/openai/gpt.py). Here is all the code required to use it to query OpenAI's ChatGPT:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're going to use `gpt-3.5-turbo` (the model behind ChatGPT) for these examples, so the component we need is [`GPTGenerator`](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/blob/main/haystack/preview/components/generators/openai.py). Here is all the code required to use it to query OpenAI's `gpt-3.5-turbo` :
```

```python
from haystack.preview.components.generators.openai.gpt import GPTGenerator

generator = GPTGenerator(api_key=api_key)
generator.run(prompt="What's the official language of France?")
# returns {"replies": ['The official language of France is French.']}
```
You can select your favorite OpenAI model by specifying a `model_name` at initialization, for example, `gpt-4`. It also supports setting an `api_base_url` for private deployments, a `streaming_callback` if you want to see the output generated live in the terminal, and optional `kwargs` to let you pass whatever other parameter the model understands, such as the number of answers (`n`), the temperature (`temperature`), etc.

Note that in this case, we're passing the API key to the component's constructor. This is unnecessary: `GPTGenerator` can read the value from the `OPENAI_API_KEY` environment variable and also from the `api_key` module variable of [`openai`'s SDK](https://github.com/openai/openai-python#usage).

> Right now, Haystack supports HuggingFace models through the [`HuggingFaceLocalGenerator`](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/blob/f76fc04ed05df7b941c658ba85adbf1f87723153/haystack/preview/components/generators/hugging_face/hugging_face_local.py#L65) component, and many more LLMs are coming soon.

Reviewer: Please check if these links are still valid. Also, we can now add `HuggingFaceTGIGenerator` here

Author: Consider that the Colab is pinned to a older Haystack 2.0 version, it needs review if we want to use the latest. I'd rather publish as is and make a review round when we publish the beta, to bring everything up-to-date. Otherwise we need to update this every day :see_no_evil:

> # PromptBuilder: structured prompts from templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PromptBuilder: structured prompts from templates
```

> Let's imagine that our LLM-powered chatbot also comes with some pre-defined questions that the user can select instead of typing in full. For example, instead of asking them to type `What's the official language of France?`, we let them select `Tell me the official languages` from a list, and they simply need to type "France" (or "Wakanda" for a change - our chatbot needs some challenges too).

Reviewer: Can we say that this is a chatbot?

Author: Good point. How can we call it?

prompt_builder.run(country="France")
# returns {'prompt': "What's the official language of France?"}
```

Note how we defined a variable, `country`, by wrapping its name in double curly brackets. PromptBuilder lets you define any input variable that way: if the prompt template was `"What's the official language of {{ nation }}?"`, the `run()` method of `PromptBuilder` would have expected a `nation` input.

This syntax comes from [Jinja2](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/intro/), a popular templating library for Python. If you have ever used Flask, Django, or Ansible, you will feel at home with `PromptBuilder`. Instead, if you never heard of any of these libraries, you can check out the [syntax](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/templates/) on Jinja's documentation. Jinja has a powerful templating language and offers way more features than you'll ever need in prompt templates, ranging from simple if statements and for loops to object access through dot notation, nesting of templates, variables manipulation, macros, full-fledged import and encapsulation of templates, and more.

> # A Simple Generative Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A Simple Generative Pipeline
```

With these two components, we can assemble a minimal pipeline to see how they work together. Connecting them is trivial: `PromptBuilder` generates a `prompt` output, and `GPTGenerator` expects an input with the same name and type.

```python
from haystack.preview import Pipeline
from haystack.preview.components.generators.openai.gpt import GPTGenerator
from haystack.preview.components.builders.prompt_builder import PromptBuilder

pipe = Pipeline()
pipe.add_component("prompt_builder", PromptBuilder(template="What's the official language of {{ country }}?"))
pipe.add_component("llm", GPTGenerator(api_key=api_key))
pipe.connect("prompt_builder", "llm")

pipe.run({"prompt_builder": {"country": "France"}})
# returns {"llm": {"replies": ['The official language of France is French.'] }}
```

Here is the pipeline graph:

![Simple LLM pipeline](simple-llm-pipeline.png)

# Make the LLM cheat

> Building the Generative part of a RAG application was very simple! So far, we only provided the question to the LLM, but no information to base its answers on. Nowadays, LLMs possess a lot of general knowledge, so questions about famous countries such as France or Germany are easy for them to reply to correctly. However, when using an app about world countries, some users may be interested in knowing more about obscure or defunct microstates that don't exist anymore. In this case, ChatGPT is unlikely to provide the correct answer without any help.

Author: Even if we're talking about the model at a quite high level? Changing it to `gpt-3.5-turbo` may look a bit jarring here. Or did you mean to replace it with "GPT 3.5" instead of "ChatGPT"?

# }
```

![PromptBuilder with two inputs pipeline](double-variable-promptbuilder-pipeline.png)

# Retrieving the context

For now, we've been playing with prompts, but the fundamental question remains unanswered: where do we get the correct text snippet for the question the user is asking? We can't expect such information as part of the input: we need our system to be able to fetch this information independently, based uniquely on the query. 

Thankfully, retrieving relevant information from large [corpora](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_corpus) (a technical term for extensive collections of data, usually text) is a task that Haystack excels at since its inception: the components that perform this task are called [Retrievers](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever).
 
> ⚠️ *At the time of writing, the [documentation](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever) still refers to the Haystack 1.x component. The high-level concepts are unchanged, but the code is very different.*

Retrieval can be performed on different data sources: to begin, let's assume we're searching for data in a local database, which is the use case that most Retrievers are geared towards.

> Let's create a small local database to store information about some European countries. Haystack offers a neat object for these small-scale demos: `InMemoryDocumentStore`. This document store is little more than a Python dictionary under the hood but provides the same exact API as much more powerful data stores and vector stores, such as [Elasticsearch](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack-core-integrations/pull/41) or [ChromaDB](https://haystack.deepset.ai/integrations/chroma-documentstore). Keep in mind that the object is called "Document Store" and not simply "datastore" because what it stores is Haystack's Document objects: a small dataclass that helps other components make sense of the data that they receive.

Author: checked, they're good

It's time to use Jinja's powerful syntax to do some unpacking on our behalf.

```text
Given the following information, answer the question.

Context: 
{% for document in documents %}
    {{ document.text }}
{% endfor %}

Question: What's the official language of {{ country }}?
```

Notice how, despite the slightly alien syntax for a Python programmer, what the template does is reasonably evident: it iterates over the documents and, for each of them, renders their `text` field.

With all these pieces set up, we can finally put them all together.

```python
template = """
Given the following information, answer the question.

Context: 
{% for document in documents %}
    {{ document.text }}
{% endfor %}

Question: What's the official language of {{ country }}?
"""
pipe = Pipeline()

pipe.add_component("retriever", InMemoryBM25Retriever(document_store=docstore))
pipe.add_component("prompt_builder", PromptBuilder(template=template))
pipe.add_component("llm", GPTGenerator(api_key=api_key))
pipe.connect("retriever", "prompt_builder.documents")
pipe.connect("prompt_builder", "llm")

> pipe.run({

Author: ```suggestion
pipe.run({
   "retriever": {"query": country},
```

        "country": "the Republic of Rose Island"
    }
})
# returns {
#     "llm": {
#         "replies": [
#             'The official language of the Republic of Rose Island is Esperanto.'
#         ]
#     }
# }
```

![BM25 RAG Pipeline](bm25-rag-pipeline.png)

Congratulations! We've just built our first, true-to-its-name RAG Pipeline. 

# Scaling up: Elasticsearch

So, we now have our running prototype. What does it take to scale this system up for production workloads?

Of course, scaling up a system to production readiness is no simple task that can be addressed in a paragraph. Still, we can start this journey with one component that can readily be improved: the document store. 

`InMemoryDocumentStore` is clearly a toy implementation: Haystack supports much more performant document stores such as [Elasticsearch](https://haystack.deepset.ai/integrations/elasticsearch-document-store), [ChromaDB](https://haystack.deepset.ai/integrations/chroma-documentstore) and [Marqo](https://haystack.deepset.ai/integrations/marqo-document-store). Since we have built our app with a BM25 retriever, let's select Elasticsearch as our production-ready document store of choice.

> > ⚠️ **Warning:**</i> *at the time of writing, Elasticsearch support for Haystack 2.0 is still [unstable](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack-core-integrations/pull/41). Keep an eye on the [integrations repository](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack-core-integrations) for updates about its upcoming release. To know how to make it work today, check out [the Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1vX_2WIRuqsXmoPMsJbqE45SYn21yuDjf?usp=drive_link) or the [gist](https://gist.github.com/ZanSara/cad6f772d3a894058db34f566e2c4042).*

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: blog-post
title: "RAG Pipelines from scratch"
description: "Let's build a simple RAG Pipeline with Haystack 2.0 by just connecting three components: a Retriever, a PromptBuilder and a Generator."
featured_image: thumbnail.png

> featured_image_caption: "A picture of the sea platform of Rose Island in black and white."

Author: ```suggestion
featured_image_caption: "The Republic of Rose Island"
```

## What is RAG?

The idea of Retrieval Augmented Generation was first defined in a [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401) by Meta in 2020. It was designed to solve a few of the inherent limitations of seq2seq models (language models that, given a sentence, can finish writing it for you), such as:

- Their internal knowledge, as vast as it may be, will always be limited and at least slightly out of date.
- They work best on generic topics rather than niche and specific areas unless they're fine-tuned on purpose, which is a costly and slow process.
- All models, even those with subject-matter expertise, tend to "hallucinate": they confidently produce false statements backed by apparently solid reasoning.
- They cannot reliably cite their sources or tell where their knowledge comes from, which makes fact-checking their replies nontrivial.

RAG solves these issues of "grounding" the LLM to reality by providing some relevant, up-to-date, and trusted information to the model together with the question. In this way, the LLM doesn't need to draw information from its internal knowledge, but it can base its replies on the snippets provided by the user.

> ![RAG Paper diagram](rag-paper-image.png "a visual representation of how RAG works, from the original paper")

Author: ```suggestion
![RAG Paper diagram](rag-paper-image.png "A visual representation of RAG from the original paper")
```
